# VAPiD: Viral Annotation Pipeline and iDentification
VAPiD is a ultra-lightweight script for quickly annotating and preparing sequences of human viruses for sending to NCBI Genbank.  VAPiD takes a fasta file of human viruses, an NCBI-generated author list, and sample metadata and exports Sequin files that are ready to submit to NCBI.

VAPiD can perform three different types of viral annotation:
1. Rapid search of a local compressed viral database for any set of viruses with a reference genome (recommended)
2. Annotation of a single viral species based on a preferred reference genome using a single Genbank accession number.
3. Comprehensive web NT database search for all viral sequences (much slower)

VAPiD is currently tested and working on Windows 10, Ubuntu 10.4, and Mac OS X.

Viruses that VAPiD has been tested with:  
RSV, Parainfluenzas, Metapneumovirus, Coronaviruses, Enterovirus/Rhinoviruses, Hepatitis A-E, Nipah, Sendai, Measles, Mumps, Rubella, Ebola, West Nile Virus, HTLV, HIV, Norovirus, JC, BK virus.

# Quickstart Installation Guide

1. Ensure you have mafft, numpy, biopython, and blast+ installed locally and on your path.
2. Download and install VAPiD (below).
3. Download VAPiD Viral Database (below).

# Quickstart Run Guide
1. Put your viral genomes in a single fasta file, preferably with the strain name for each sequence as the sequence header.
2. Make a author metadata submission template file for your submission at
https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/template/submission/
3. Run VAPiD.
`vapid --db all_virus.fasta <your_virus.fasta> <your_author_metadata.sbt>`
4. VAPiD will prompt you for sample collection dates, collection locations, and coverages for each sequence in your fasta file.
5. Email .sqn files for each virus to gb-sub@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov


# Installation

**Mac or Linux**

1. Install all dependencies (Shout-out to the wonderful people who wrote these!)

Python - tested almost exclusively on python 2.7.14. Python 3 and above have syntax issues and actually break when you try to manually enter metadata.

If you're running Python < 2.7.4 follow this guide to install pip (You may need administrator privileges.)
https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installing/

Download the get-pip.py and run it from the command line by typing `python get-pip.py`

If you're using Python >= 2.7.4 or you've successfully installed pip:
Open a command line and type

`pip install numpy`

`pip install biopython`

Now download and unzip this repository to your computer (anywhere will work)

Then you'll need to install tbl2asn and put it on your path. (Another option is to download tbl2asn and simply unpack it directly into the folder you've unpacked this repository into.) 
tbl2asn can be found at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/tbl2asn2/

**Windows**

1. Install Python 2.7.14 https://www.python.org/downloads/
  Make sure that when this is installing on the third step 'Customize your python installation' the box that says put python on your path is checked. This makes installing and running this annotator much easier. (For best results run the installer program as administrator)
  If you don't see this option during python installation, after its fully installed open a command prompt window and type:

`set PATH=%PATH%;C:\python27\`

  or change C:\python27\ to wherever Python was installed (but C:\python27\ is the default install location).  

2. Install Numpy and Biopython 

`python -m pip install numpy`

`python -m pip install biopython`


3. Then download and unzip this repository (which can be downloaded with the green link on the right to the top of the page) to your computer (anywhere will do)

4. Download tbl2asn for windows https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/tbl2asn2/  and unzip it, then copy and paste every single file in the tbl2asn folder (there should be like 7 .dlls and an .exe that is simply called tbl2asn) into the folder that you just made in step 3.

**After the above has completed there's still a bit of setup that needs to be done.** 

1. Download the all_virus.fasta reference database over on the release tab, (https://github.com/rcs333/VAPiD/releases/). Download the .nhr .nsq and .nin file and place them in the VAPiD folder

2. Install MAFFT using your favorite package manager ('brew install mafft' or 'sudo apt-get install mafft') or download and install from https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/ for your appropriate system. (THIS IS ALREADY DONE FOR WINDOWS and is included under the GPL licence) Make sure you select the all-in-one version. (Mac and Linux) Unzip the folder and place all files in the folder where this repository is living.

3. A example.sbt file that contains your name and information about the organization that you wish to submit your sequences to NCBI under. This .sbt file can be generated by filling out the form here https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/template/submission/

4. Put the newly generated .sbt file onto your computer. (Generally it's easiest to just put it in the VAPiD folder). If you'll be submitting multiple sequences from different people you can generate more than one, put them all in this folder, and choose which one you want to use at run time. 

5. (Optional)
You can generate a .csv file with most metadata that you wish to associate with your sequences. The file should have across the top Strain (the name of the fasta sequences that you'll import) followed by columns with NCBI approved metadata https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Sequin/modifiers.html
 
An important note is that the strain names in the metadata csv MUST match the sequence names in your fasta files. (i.e. the part after the >) 

An example metadata file has been provided under the name example_metadata.csv - this metadata file will work with the example fasta file provided (example.fasta).

If you don't have very many sequences at a time or you include a fasta not in your metadata sheet the program will automatically prompt you for strain name, collection date, country of collection and coverage (for ngs reads). You must fill out strain name, collection date and location or NCBI will not accept your submission. Coverage is not necessary and if skipped during the automatic prompting, will not create any issues.

# Usage - vapid.py

Create your fasta file with all of the sequences that you would like to annotate. You can have as many sequences as you want. And you should name the sequences in your fasta file what you would like the strain name to be. (For the provided fasta file, example.fasta, this name would be 'test'). **FASTA STRAIN NAMES SHOULD NOT HAVE SPECIAL CHARACTERS IN THEM!!** (Things like ' " ? - # * ect.)

Then you would need to run the vapid.py script from the command line. First cd to the directory that VAPiD is living in - if you cloned from github it'll be ../VAPiD/ 

**Example CD Command**
Just change the path here to whever you ended up unzipping the VAPiD folder on your computer. 

`cd C:\User\Downloads\VAPiD`



**General Usage**

`python vapid.py fasta_file_path author_template_path --metadata_loc metadata_info_path --db custom_database_location --online`

**Example Usage (With metadata in the sheet)**

`python vapid.py example.fasta example.sbt --metadata_loc example_metadata.csv`

**Example Usage (No metadata sheet)**

`python vapid.py example.fasta example.sbt`

**Example Usage (With metadata sheet AND specifying the reference)**

`python vapid.py example.fasta example.sbt --metadata_loc example_metadata.csv --r 'KF530268.1'`
The quotation marks around the reference accession number are *required*

**Example Usage (with a custom blast database)**

`python vapid.py example.fasta example.sbt --metadata_loc example_metadata.csv --db /User/my/path/to/a/working/blastdb/`
You need to have blastn avalible on the system path and the specified directory needs to be set up correctly or the program will crash

**Example Usage (online with no metadata)**

`python vapid.py example.fasta example.sbt --online`

`python vapid.py -h` prints out a list of arguments and some help information

The metadata_loc argument is optional and if you don't provide a metadata location or if your sheet doesn't contain metadata for some sequeneces the program will prompt you for it.

You can just put relative paths to your sbt and fasta file, I find it is easiest to store everything in the VAPiD
folder - that way you don't have to worry about typing paths. 

# Output

The program will run for a bit and generate a folder for each sequence in your fasta file. The folder will be named the same as what you named the strain in the fasta file. (So if the first line of your fasta file is >SC12309 then there will be a folder called SC12309 with all of the .gbf, .tbl, and ect files that you need and love.) 

tbl2asn will also spit out some errors and warnings onto the command line.

The program itself will also examine each sequence record for stop codons and notify you of which ones contain stops.

Inside each folder will be some files, you can examine .gbf files either in a text editor or in something like Genious.
To submit your sequence to NCBI simply email the .sqn file to gb-sub@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov and then shortly after your sequences will be deposited on NCBI. 

# Implementation Details and Important Notes

Right now we accomplish the annotation by searching blast for the best hit that is a complete genome and using a maaft alignment to generate annotations for the supplied sequence. We can handle some ribosomal slippage as well as RNA editing in all human viruses. - Following this note - a large problem is actually inconsistent spelling in genbank sequence records or sequence records that do not have every protein annotated. I continually try to update this program to deal with problems that come up, but this is a major source of error right now.


# Future directions
Paper to be released! 
